M. Sabeti, R. Boostani, S.D. Katebi, G.W. Price,
Selection of relevant features for EEG signal classification of schizophrenic patients,
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control,
Volume 2, Issue 2,
2007,
Pages 122-134,
ISSN 1746-8094,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2007.03.003.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1746809407000237)
Abstract: In this paper, EEG signals of 20 schizophrenic patients and 20 age-matched control participants are analyzed with the objective of determining the more informative channels and finally distinguishing the two groups. For each case, 22 channels of EEG were recorded. A two-stage feature selection algorithm is designed, such that, the more informative channels are first selected to enhance the discriminative information. Two methods, bidirectional search and plus-L minus-R (LRS) techniques are employed to select these informative channels. The interesting point is that most of selected channels are located in the temporal lobes (containing the limbic system) that confirm the neuro-phychological differences in these areas between the schizophrenic and normal participants. After channel selection, genetic algorithm (GA) is employed to select the best features from the selected channels. In this case, in addition to elimination of the less informative channels, the redundant and less discriminant features are also eliminated. A computationally fast algorithm with excellent classification results is obtained. Implementation of this efficient approach involves several features including autoregressive (AR) model parameters, band power, fractal dimension and wavelet energy. To test the performance of the final subset of features, classifiers including linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and support vector machine (SVM) are employed to classify the reduced feature set of the two groups. Using the bidirectional search for channel selection, a classification accuracy of 84.62% and 99.38% is obtained for LDA and SVM, respectively. Using the LRS technique for channel selection, a classification accuracy of 88.23% and 99.54% is also obtained for LDA and SVM, respectively. Finally, the results are compared and contrasted with two well-known methods namely, the single-stage feature selection (evolutionary feature selection) and principal component analysis (PCA)-based feature selection. The results show improved accuracy of classification in relatively low computational time with the two-stage feature selection.
Keywords: EEG signal classification; Schizophrenic; Genetic algorithm
